.TH ggobi 1 "30 September 2000"
.SH NAME
.B ggobi 
\- interactive dynamic graphics program for data visualization

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ggobi
[
.B \-xml
]
[
.B \-ascii
]
[
.B \-version
.B \--version
]
filename

.SH DESCRIPTION
.I ggobi
is an interactive dynamic graphics program for data
visualization, especially designed for the exploration of
multivariate data.  It represents a significant redesign of 
its precedessor
.I xgobi (www.research.att.com/areas/stat/xgobi),
with multiple plotting windows, a color lookup table manager,
an XML file format for data, and other changes.  It can be
embedded into other software and controlled using an API
(Application Programming Interface).

GGobi's plot types include the scatterplot, scatterplot matrix,
parallel coordinates plot, and time series plot.
These are some of the tools available for plot display and
manipulation:
.RS .25i
.IP o 2
Cycling rapidly through two-variable scatter plots.
.IP o 2
Grand tours and correlation tours: smooth randomized sequences of
two-dimensional projections in order to explore a higher-dimensional
point cloud of multivariate data.  Projections can be manually
controlled and optimized with projection pursuit.
.IP o 2
Brushing: the ability to change the color or plotting
character of a point or a group of points.
.IP o 2
Hiding groups:  using checkboxes to specify which brushed
groups should be plotted, or included in calculations.
.IP o 2
Scaling: moving and reshaping the plot interactively.
.IP o 2
Identification: displaying a label next to a point in the plot window.
.IP o 2
Linked views: Brushing, identification and touring are linked;
that is, actions in one window are immediately reflected in
another window displaying the same data.
.IP o 2
Moving points: For low-dimensional projections, points can be moved
on the screen.
.IP o 2
Subsetting: Subsamples can be drawn either systematically or randomly.
.IP o 2
Jittering: Variables can be jittered, which is useful for discrete
variables that take on only few values.
.IP o 2
Missing values: are accepted and can be dealt with by imputation of
constant values, random values, or user-supplied imputed values.
Missing value patterns can be examined in a separate linked ggobi
window.
.IP o 2
Variable transformations: A menu of transformations is available.

''' .IP o 2
''' Smooths: Smooth curves can be drawn through point clouds.
''' .IP o 2
''' Case label list: shown in a separate window, linked to the main
''' window for labeling points.
''' .IP o 2
''' Postscript plotting: The contents of the plot windows can be written
''' out to postscript files for high-quality plotting.
.RE

GGobi has a direct manipulation interface, and all the above actions
are performed using the mouse.

In addition, ggobi can be treated as a C library and directly
embedded in (or linked with) other software.  For example, it can be
controlled from the R command line or from a Perl or Python script.

Execute
.IR help(ggobi)
within R for information; if the ggobi function
has not been installed, see www.ggobi.org for instructions.

.SH OPTIONS

.B \-xml
.LP
.RS .25i
Use a single XML file as input.  The XML format is documented in 
XML.pdf, which is included in the ggobi distribution.  See the
sample data files.
.RE

.B \-ascii
.LP
.RS .25i
Use a set of ascii files as input.  These files are almost compatible
with the files used by xgobi, but the .color files use numbers between
1 and 10 instead of color names, and some files are not accepted
(.erase, .vgroups, .edges, .nlinkable, .rgroups).  
.RE

.SH FILES
ggobi's file input can take two basic forms:  (1) the style
of multiple files, sharing a common basename, that was used
in xgobi, and (2) one file in XML.  A utility, xmlConvert,
is provided to transform a set of files into an XML file.

The XML format allows multiple datasets to be included within
a single file.  Those datasets can be related using the
.I id
tag.  If cases in two datasets have the same id, they are
linked for brushing and identification.  The id tag can also
be used to specify the endpoints for a line segment, or edge,
between two points.  See XML.pdf for a more detailed explanation.

If the file type is not specified on the command line, ggobi
will attempt to identify whether the file is XML or ASCII, and
if the suffix hasn't been specified, it will first look for an XML
version of the data.

The multiple-file format is described here. 

.nf
.B filename.dat
.fi
.RS .25i

The data input file
should be an ASCII file with the data matrix arranged in rows and
columns; in ASCII, rows must be distinguished by carriage
returns, and columns can be separated by any amount of white
space.  Missing values can be coded as ".", "NA" or "na".  (The
input file can also be a binary file, which can be produced
within ggobi once the ASCII data has been read in.) ggobi accepts
other input about the display of the data from files as well.  If
the data is in a file named

.nf
.B filename.row
.B filename.rowlab
.B filename.case
.fi
.RS .25i

Row or case labels: a label for each row of the data matrix, which is
displayed in the identification mode.  The file should contain one
label per line.

.RE

.nf
.B filename.col
.B filename.column
.B filename.collab
.B filename.var
.fi
.RS .25i

Column or variable labels: a label for each column of the data matrix,
which becomes part of the ggobi variable selection panel.  The file
should contain one label per line.   The label may contain white space.

To specify axis ranges, use the vertical bar "|" as a field separator
and add minimum and maximum values, so that the line looks like
this:  name|minval|maxval
.RE

.nf
.B filename.colors
.fi
.RS .25i

Brushing colors: an integer for each case, one per line,
representing the index of a vector of colors, in the range [0:ncolors-1].
.RE

.nf
.B filename.glyphs
.fi
.RS .25i

Brushing glyphs: a glyph type and size for each point in the plot,
representing a row or case of the data.  The glyph types are as follows:
.RS .25i

.nf
plus: the glyph '+'
x: the glyph 'x'
or: an open rectangle
fr: a filled rectangle
oc: an open circle
fc: a filled circle
.: a single-pixel point
.fi

The sizes range from 0 to 7.

Note:  Users of Microsoft Windows should avoid using the circle, since these
are drawn very slowly.


.RE

.nf
.B filename.missing
.fi
.RS .25i

A file identical in structure to filename.dat, where non-zero values
indicate positions with missing (or censored, or otherwise
exceptional) values.  This file represents the pattern of missing
values in the data; it can be examined in a separate window by
selecting
.I New scatterplot 
or
.I New scatterplot matrix
from the
.I MISSING VALUES PLOTS
submenu of the
.I Window
menu.
.RE


.SH AUTHORS
.nf
Deborah Swayne (dfs@research.att.com)
Dianne Cook (dicook@iastate.edu)
Duncan Temple Lang (duncan@research.bell-labs.com)
Andreas Buja (andreas@research.att.com)
.fi
.SH CONTACT
Deborah Swayne (dfs@research.att.com)
.SH SEE ALSO
Sample data files are included in the ggobi distribution.

For papers and further pointers, check www.ggobi.org, and
the xgobi web site, www.research.att.com/areas/stat/xgobi.

In particular, the manual is in manual.pdf.  The XML format
is described in XML.pdf.  The manual for use of R and GGobi
together is RGGobi.pdf.

.SH BUGS
Probably too numerous to mention, but you do the authors a favor if
you report the ones you notice.

